---
title: Standards
---

why do people hold us to higher standards than they do other resources? is it because ours is in early access so they feel there is still opportunity to change it or because we're reaching such a wider audience. making it more accessible to more people means we are reaching people to whom existing resources were way over their heads so then we get the demand to make it even more accessible for the people who are at the lower end of being able to understand our book. but it also means we reached more pedants who hated the previous resources and want ours to be more correct. and it also means we reached more people who believe on principle that our work should made available for free or at least open-sourced.

but demanding more work, more precision and also demanding it for free or open-sourced where anyone can dick around with the precision is a contradiction.

we've literally had people complain that we do not have *enough* exercises, or that the function names we use are sometimes too silly, and then turn around and recommend LYAH or the Wikibook to other students. OK. those resources have things to commend them, surely, but we have a crapton more exercises than either -- so why is ours not enough but a total lack (lyah) or substantially fewer is ok?

we had a guy complain that we're mixing up parameters and arguments. we actually are trying to exercise some precision here because we want to encourage thinking about types and terms as separate spaces. however, this is a level of precision not exercised, so far as we have been able to discover, in any other haskell resource, including the report and the typeclassopedia. this is not to disrespect the very fine work those authors did. it's simply unclear why we'd be held to a higher standard than that. 