---
title: Ten Novels
---

I've been wanting to start writing more about books, and I want to start with this, with ten novels that shaped the way I think about and see the world. I'm going to try to explain why each was so influential for me, but -- ah, but! --  
  - I haven't read most of them for years. So I'm writing about them now only from memory.
  - Some of them just came, as books sometimes do, at the right moment in my life to hit me a certain way.
  - The interpretations are, at any rate, subjective, of course. They may not hit any other reader the same way.
  - These are all great novels, with one possible exception. Thus most of them are layered and the themes that struck me are not necessarily the most important or meaningful themes of the books.

There may be spoilers. I don't know. I still like reading books even if I know how they end, because most of the joy is in how you get to the ending. I am a huge Agatha Christie fan, and I have read some of the Poirot novels 5 or 6 times each. I'm hoping that some of these you may not have heard of, and perhaps one or two of them will strike your fancy. 

### The Borribles by Michael de Larrabeiti

The Borribles is a trilogy for young readers. I cannot overstate how much impact the first two books had on me when I first read them, when I was about 8 or 9. 

The Borribles are a group of runaway kids in London who live in the sewers. They have pointed ears and are constantly trying to avoid interactions with the police because if the police catch them -- and they steal a lot in order to survive and are sometimes engaged in wars with rival gangs of sewer kids -- they will clip their ears and then the kids will be returned to normal society where they will have to grow up. The grown up world is consumerist, antagonistic (instead of cooperative, like the Borribles lifestyle), and authoritarian. There is hierarchy within the Borrible tribe, but authority is based on achievement and is still more cooperative than antagonistic.

The themes that resonated with me were the intense anti-materialism and anti-authoritarianism and the ways that these kids formed and enforced their own codes of ethics. This is the book that got me started thinking of ethics in an analytical way. That's no small thing for a book aimed at young readers.

I didn't get the third book until I was an adult. I think it was banned for a while due to the violence. They are violent books. Kids fight for their lives and for what they believe in, and there are a few deaths, some memorably horrific. I have given them to my older son to read, and he loved them as well. We've talked about the ethics of some of the decisions the kids make in the books. 

### The Last of the Really Great Whangdoodles by Julie Andrews Edwards

Yes, *that* Julie Andrews. 

This is another children's novel, and I believe I've read it more than 20 times over the years. For a long time, I would read it every time I got sick and got to stay home from school. But what a book!

Three children live next door to a nutty professor who visits a land in which fantastic creatures such as the Oily Prock and the Whangdoodle live. He teaches the children to go with him, using these things called "scrappy caps." Each time they go, there are adventures, and the eventual goal is to get to the palace to meet the last Whangdoodle who rules over the fantasy land. It turns out the Whangdoodle is in want of a female Whangdoodle (it is a truth universally acknowledged, you know), and fantastic and amazing things happen. The descriptions of all the creatures and features of Whangdoodleland are glorious, and for the young reader, it's all enchanting.

But you must know, as an adult, what's coming. The children lose their scrappy caps or something like that, and they are saddened that they can't go to Whangdoodleland anymore (or perhaps they lose them in that world and then can't go home?). But of course they can. The important thing wasn't the caps. The caps were only something to believe in. The real power to go to Whangdoodleland existed within the children the whole time. 

This was the first book I ever remember reading where, after each time I read it, the world itself seemed more elegant and enchanted than it had before I read it. It was as if it improved my actual vision, and I saw more beauty and with great clarity than I had before.

But, of course, the book is just a scrappy cap, something to believe in. That power of seeing beauty and being enchanted was already within me, wasn't it?

### Red Sky at Morning by Richard Bradford

After I outgrew The Last of the Really Great Whangdoodles, this was the book I read and re-read every time I needed cheering up. It's a funny novel, although the ending is not happy. I do not know if the humor translates well to people who did not grow up in New Mexico, as that is where most of the novel takes place, and much of the humor is in the "local color" category, it seems to me. Still. It is one of those books that can make me laugh out loud just thinking about certain scenes.

The Arnolds are a family from Mobile, Alabama, who own a small property in a small town in northern New Mexico. When Mr. Arnold joins the Navy in World War II, Mrs. Arnold and her teenage son, Josh, go to live in New Mexico for the duration. Mrs. Arnold suffers a nervous breakdown, leaving Josh in many ways on his own, although his father continues to play a role through correspondence. It's a coming of age story with a lot of rather vivid humor.

What resonated with me here? What are the themes that spoke to me? I wanted to be Marcia, for one thing. 

### The Plague by Albert Camus

Well, let me start by saying this: The Plague is not my favorite of Camus's works. It's also not the first I read. The Fall is my favorite of his books, followed closely by The Exile and the Kingdom, and of course the first of his books I read was The Stranger. So many people start with The Stranger and think Camus's message is LOL NOTHING MATTERS and never read anything else he wrote, and that's a damn shame. He's a much more interesting thinker than that. I usually tell people, if they ask, that they should start with The Plague if they want to understand Camus because here the theme of, yes, the world is absurd and existence is absurd and yet he makes the case that we should still act morally, caring for one another. (The Fall is a more complex book and please do not start your Camus with that one because, while I think it's brilliant, it's also difficult. Interestingly, The Meursault Investigation which purports to be a rebuttal to The Stranger owes at least as much to The Fall.)

plot summary

What does it mean to be moral? 

### A Night of Serious Drinking by Rene Daumal

My God, I only read this book once but it stuck with me like a ghost.


### A Soldier of the Great War by Mark Helprin

### Gabriela, Clove and Cinnamon by Jorge Amado

I think this is the first time when I thought I could love being a woman. 

### Angle of Repose by Wallace Stegner

### Sabbath's Theater by Philip Roth

I don't think I've ever met another woman who liked this book, and I can understand why, I think. Well, in fact, Roth doesn't seem to be much of a hit with the ladies. No matter. 

### Some Prefer Nettles by Junichiro Tanizaki

