---
title: Bad at Math
tags: Haskell
---

maybe, i don't think whatever product thing you and Alex were talking about bothers me the way it bothers y'all, probably due to my extreme badness at math
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
'Untrained' in math, not 'bad'!
it amounts to the same
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
It's way more positive 😜
not versus not-yet
the not-yet is way more stressful
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
hm
to me it makes it sound like it's going to be easy, like i should expect it to be relatively easy and painless and it's not. not at all
so then i just get a lot of anxiety about how it's so fucking hard for me when it's just a matter of training, of accumulating trivialities or whatever
and then i'm like well if they're trivial then wtf is wrong with me
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
oh no it's always hard
i remember when we wrote the Applicative chapter and it was *deathly* hard for me
i just finished indexing that chapter today
i've come a long way since we wrote it
i didn't remember just how much we harp on the monoid thing
that's me, of course
me harping on the monoids
it's good tho, i got it. finally. 
so like i figure probably someday the category theory bullshit is something i can ~manage~ but saying "i'm bad at math" is me reminding myself that it's going to be really fucking hard, so that the hardness of it doesn't put me off when i start. idk if that makes sense to anyone else but it works for me. i'm bad at Haskell. i'm bad at math. these things are not things that come easily or naturally to me and i need to remember that they do not come naturally but that eventually with enough gnashing of teeth and head-desking i will come to grips with it.