I don't think men would actually like a world where women said a decisive no every time they were doubtful or uncomfortable with the encounter y'know?
Relationships are a kind of negotiation in a lot of ways and a clear decisive no closes all the doors
Sometimes it's what you want to do and have to do
But sometimes the otherwise genuinely awesome guy was just not really thinking clearly in that moment
But you don't know that, you can't, until afterwards
Seriously women decisively saying no every time a guy was being too aggressively horny would be the end of relationships entirely

But that's also how something that happens the next day can color how you remember the experience
You're on the fence maybe, it was uncomfortable and you felt like it was too fast or aggressive but ok he was just too excited. But sure if he's a dick the next day, doesn't want to talk to you at all, won't return your messages, says you're not really that attractive, ok then you know but now it's too late, you can't go back and not fuck him
So you regret it but that regret is even more so because you knew you were uncomfortable at the time. Why didn't you stop it? Because you were trying to believe no he really does care about me even if he's not acting like it right now
Maybe instead of asking why women don't say no more clearly maybe we should be asking why men don't make their intentions clear at all and lie and say they like you or whatever and then treat you like garbage?
When men regret sex the next day they make it about the woman and her looks mostly. "Moped", "coyote ugly", "beer goggles"
So you thought this guy was just super hot for you, sure, he couldn't even slow down to let you get comfortable enough to enjoy it, then the next day you're too ugly for him. Sure. Makes total sense
But yes let's definitely have a rational conversation about why women can't give a clear no in the moment with a guy she likes trying to pressure her into sex
Not about men, it's never about how you have to read their minds to know whether they're 1) a really ok guy who is just overexcited, or 2) a rapist or abuser
Right? Everyone loses their temper sometimes. What makes it abuse is it happening not one time (or rarely) but often
How often? When do you draw the line decide he's not gonna change or stop and walk out? Is there a clear bright signal men are somehow sending to let us know that we're just missing?
Right definitely the problem is women having to say no more clearly to horny men who biologically can't control themselves. This is definitely the problem
Sorry
It's late and I'm tired of these very reasonable men just asking questions because for the love of GOD these have all been answered a million times and if they had even the tiniest shred of understanding of the other half of the entire goddamn population they would be able to answer them for themselves
They don't. They have not a single goddamned clue what women's lives are like, it's unbelievable. We're not nuns, we live right beside them.

this guy won't call or text me back, so he's not saying "no" to a relationship, right? am i supposed to read his mind?

like the Catholics are probably right to some extent; we shouldn't be having so much sex with people we barely know. but men made that world, not women. as i pointed out before, when the so called sexual revolution started, most women couldn't have their own bank accounts
now we got all these dudes on the cryptocurrency subreddits who put their family's whole savings into some crypto that's now crashing and their wives don't know they did it and they're contemplating suicide
suicide instead of helping their wives and children get out of this hole that they dug
in the old days, men did this with gambling or drink or whatever and women had basically no recourse which is when the great Women Getting Pissed Off movement began
but back then men could have their wives locked in an asylum pretty easily if she was complaining too much
if men want this sexual world they built, then they have to take some of the responsibility on themselves. don't lie about your intentions to get someone in bed and then go back on it, it's the same thing as someone reluctantly agreeing to sex and then regretting it and reneging later

the problem isn't that most men are predators, although it's not like we can tell which are and which aren't by looking at them. the problem is that most very decent men still treat women pretty badly when it comes to sex, refuse to take responsibility for their actions when they're sexually excited, and are still mostly decent guys.

> Just about all men should see some past encounter represented in the story as well. Decent men. -- fast company

And that is the point. Most men --the vast majority of men-- are not Harvey Weinstein. They are decent men, and the best we can expect from decent men is to be told we're frigid if we aren't ready for sex immediately, a slut if we are; that at any rate, whatever he said about his feelings for us and what he might want in a relationship may well become null and void the next day if he has "regrets"; that he may express his regrets by calling you a "moped" or worse or by not texting or calling so that you have to read his mind to discover he's suddenly "just not into you"; that for very many decent men some part of their sexuality hinges on making you uncomfortable, sometimes in bizarre ways (like trying to watch you urinate all the time when you've said you don't want to be watched); that however you have expressed you have tried to soften your refusal, in hopes that he is a decent guy who will now slow down and realize that a relationship between you depends on you not walking out right now but also you not having sex right now. And in any event that guy you were dating for a while who seemed decent enough may well have been photographing or filming you without your knowledge or consent and is right now, since you broke up with him, sharing it with the internet.

This has been my whole life (ok, in fairness, it started when i was about 12) with men, and I actually happen to *like* sex, and still I'm tired of dealing with men's sexual behavior.

Now that we're on the subject, where in the fuck does the idea that women, who are said to have a "biological clock" and are known to be the primary bearers of children in our species, not get just as horny as men? Why does men's responsibility vanish when they're horny, but we still have to negotiate this whole "he wants X, i don't want to give him X but i do want Y and maybe i can get Y by giving him X" bullshit? You have *no fucking idea* how strong the urge to make babies can get. You might think about that the next time you invite a woman you barely know back to your apartment.
