## Disjunctive monoids

Monoids aren't only about *combining* things; sometimes they're about *choosing* one or the other. Since we think of canonical monoids such as addition, multiplication, and list concatenation, we develop an intuition for monoids as being primarily about *combining* two values into one. It might be more helpful to think of them as instead *merging* or *uniting* two values into one, although maybe plain English just isn't going to do justice to it.

One possibility for monoids is that of Boolean conjunction -- this is where list cross-products, multiplication, and the particular Maybe applicative we're looking at up there come in. We can write out a Boolean truth table using Maybe values instead of Bool values and see that the pattern we see in the above are the same:

```haskell
-- Nothing ~ False
-- Just a ~ True
Nothing Nothing = Nothing
Nothing Just a  = Nothing
Just a  Nothing = Nothing
Just a  Just a  = Just a (where the a is the `mappend` of the two `a` values)
```

We can get a different result from our Maybe applicative by using one of its alternative monoids of course, which means we need to call them by a new name:

> First and Last examples

λ> (First (Just 'a'), (+8)) <*> (First (Just 'b'), 7)
(First {getFirst = Just 'a'},15)
it :: Num b => (First Char, b)

λ> (Last (Just 'a'), (+8)) <*> (Last (Just 'b'), 7)
(Last {getLast = Just 'b'},15)
it :: Num b => (Last Char, b)

λ> ((Just "a"), (+8)) <*> ((Just "b"), 7)
(Just "ab",15)
it :: Num b => (Maybe [Char], b)

λ> ((Just "a"), (+8)) <*> (Nothing, 7)
(Just "a",15)
it :: Num b => (Maybe [Char], b)

λ> (Nothing, (+8)) <*> (Nothing, 7)
(Nothing,15)
it :: (Num b, Monoid a) => (Maybe a, b)

λ> (Last (Just 'a'), (+8)) <*> (Last Nothing, 7)
(Last {getLast = Just 'a'},15)
it :: Num b => (Last Char, b)

λ> (Last Nothing, (+8)) <*> (Last Nothing, 7)
(Last {getLast = Nothing},15)
it :: Num b => (Last a, b)

-- First and Last Truth Tables (disjunctive pattern)
Nothing Nothing = Nothing
Just a Nothing = Just a
Nothing Just a = Just a
Just a Just a = Just a where the a values are not themselves mappended, but one or the other Just is chosen and returned


I don't think there is actually a place to put the ZipList Monoid without reorganizing some things in ghc.
I can't find any module in which both of those things are imported.
Well, not both, the *three* things that definition needs - semigroup, monoid, and ziplist
does normal list have a semigroup?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
yeah, it's defined in Data.Semigroup
i didn't realize. i mean it seems mathematically like it should but at the same time what does one use it for. when do you not want an identity for list concatenation and stuff?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
The problem is Monoid is defined in GHC.Base
when they're NonEmpty of course but otherwise?
yeh
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
Well take for example
λ> stimes 4 [1,2,3]
[1,2,3,1,2,3,1,2,3,1,2,3]
the constraint on stimes is Semigroup, so
yes but why
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
hm bad example
idk, take any paramatric function that only needs a semigroup
well again i can see why you want them on NonEmpty
but it seems like the lack of an identity coupled with the lack of insurance that you don't have an empty list is
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
oh, here's an example, AccValidation
Accumulates on the left into a semigroup, right
iirc
is there a compelling reason why it couldn't be monoid tho?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
it would just be unnecessarily constraining
Then you couldn't use NonEmpty with AccValidation
yet people still use monads when they could use applicatives
but yes fair enough.
i'm just wary of using semigroups when you *do* want an identity. some people still use monads when they should use applicatives; some people go the other way and use semigroups when they should use monoids. in my humble, so humble, opinion of course.
choose the right algebra for the job
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I'm just gonna PR with a semigroup, and in it I'll complain that I can't figure out where to put the monoid, and see if anyone has any suggestions
as you wish
i've been asking myself a lot since i wrote that post about why applicatives are monoidal
if a semigroup can give rise to an applicative functor
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
Like in the case of AccValidation?
I think it's because a semigroup can give rise to a monoid
in the case of Maybe
?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
instance Semigroup a => Monoid (Maybe a)
the Semigroup constraint on AccValidation is on the a innit?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
it is
But as you say, the a and the b are not present together at the same time, which is critical
to how the semigroup gets promoted to a monoid in some sense
yeh but AccValidation itself has a Monoid
i think? yeah like Either's
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
the underlying monoid, I think, actually being Maybe a
i was actually thinking of NonEmpty
not AccValidation and i'm sorry to say you lost me
NonEmpty has an applicative
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
oh hm
so it must be that a semigroup can give rise to an applicative functor yeah?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I think the monoid that gives rise to NonEmpty's applicative is the list monoid
hmm, I need to eat.
so a monoid is a relationship between a type, a binary associative function, and an identity value. that's why the zip monoid gives rise to a different applicative functor than regular list does. NonEmpty being a different type and not having an identity, i think i'm more comfortable with the idea that it's really the type+binary associative operation that gives rise to the applicative functor
at least this is how i understand it and why i started thinking this is why Monoid doesn't just have two operations in it. we handle it in Haskell now by just naming the types different things, so Sum has a Monoid and Product has a Monoid, and the relationship between a type name, an operation, and an identity is preserved.
which is fine. i started disliking it for purely aesthetic reasons, really, just the newtype wrappers bother me
but then i realized that this pattern is absolutely pervasive
tuples in haskell only admit one monoid, i think, but that's a constraint due to Haskell not due to their theoretical monoidal possibilities
so then like a good Haskeller i want to call attention to the fact that there are two main patterns here, not one.
i think the current methods obscure that, and then obscure that it's the type + operation that give rise to applicative functors, and then also traversals, and so forth.
and probably it is semigroup that does it, tho the monoid is helpful for the parametric constraint on any type arguments
idk if i'm making sense
this is how i think about it now tho
2 mins

I'm really starting to feel like semigroups and applicatives should be more related than they are
like, I feel like possibly Maybe's semigroup/monoid is the wrong one
i think you're right, but semigroups came later than monoids (in haskell, at least) so historical reasons probably?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
idk, the monoid too though maybe
most of these instances I'm writing, I'm realizing how the semigroup/monoid is just so damn similar to the applicative
😀
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
but Maybe isn't
babe i think i'm gettin to you
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
but it could be
yes
the regular Maybe monoid is conjunctive, right?
three cases return Nothing, one returns Just (a <> a) ?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
λ> Just "a" <> Nothing
Just "a"
whichever one that is
oh no
that's the Maybe monoid?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
λ> mappend (Just "a") Nothing
Just "a"
yeah
sigh
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I just made a tweet and then realized it probably also sounds like I had the thought spontaneously, like my blog did
i couldn't remember which one is *the* Maybe monoid
oh
sorry
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
for what?
for inhibiting you like that by telling you
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
It's okay, I don't feel inhibited
it's just another thing to think about
well that then, sorry
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
don't be ❤
oh god yeah i just realized
oh my god
OH MY GOD
ok this is bad
but i have to tell you
i couldn't remember what *the* Maybe monoid and semigroup were and
i just *assumed* they were the ones that would be coherent with the Applicative
i should have looked
oh christ i've been teaching my students to write "the Maybe monoid" more like what i was expecting
what the shit is that instance
oh babe i've been bad
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I don't think you've done any irreparable harm
i mean since i'm teaching, we use the instances we're writing, not the Prelude ones, and i hadn't noticed that it wasn't teh same
BECAUSE YOU WANT THE ONE THAT'S COHERENT WITH APPLICATIVE RIGHT?
omfg, no it's ok wrt to my students, i can fix that, i think
but
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I kinda love that you made that assumption tbh
it's not, right? it's different from the applicative, am i losin my mind?
no that's what you were saying earlier
thank you ❤
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
wait so what is mempty here
Just mempty?
And you put a Monoid constrait on the a?
where
on Maybe?
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
yeah
because Nothing isn't a mempty
no, you don't need a Monoid constraint on the Maybe Applicative instance
no, correct
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
I mean on the Monoid instance
oh
sorry
uh, yes, i think so
so i write my Maybe monoids conjunctively, anything mappended with a Nothing returns Nothing, Just a <> Just b returns Just (a <> b) so you need a Monoid constraint on the `a` yeah
Chris Martin (ch.martin@gmail.com)
It's kinda like
Haskell's Maybe represents the possibility of a value being there...
... and the Maybe consistent with applicative represents a value that has the possibility of *not* being there

https://twitter.com/chris__martin/status/840750555945402368

https://twitter.com/argumatronic/status/760903133249712128

https://twitter.com/ejenk/status/840759424868352002 -- but i think saying the Maybe monoids are "the same except wrt Nothing" is like saying Boolean conjunction and disjunction are the same "except wrt False".

https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2014-November/024416.html

https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2015-July/026057.html
